 I am very happy to be amidst Rovers, Rangers and their leaders and to honour the awardees in recognition of their excellent work in the filed of Social Service and Community Work. Sir Robert Baden-Powell, Founder of the World Scout Movement and the Chief Scout of the World had characterized ‘Rovering’ as a “brotherhood of open air and service.” As the youth navigates the turbulent transition from adolescence to responsible adulthood, Rovering infuses their journey with the principles of service to God, country and fellow citizens. It gives an opportunity to serve one’s community, expand one's range of skills, and enjoy fellowship, social, outdoor and cultural activities. Friends We are a predominantly young country. The young citizens are an important national resource that must be skilled and harnessed for their progress and that of the nation. The Scout and Guide Movement has played an important role globally and in India in the training of youth, building their character and social outlook. The special emphasis placed on adventure and on young people from various backgrounds working together and taking responsibility, on developing self-sufficiency and on learning through doing have transformed the lives of many young people. Some of the concerns that prompted Sir Baden-Powell to embark on a second life in Scouting are visible all around us. Let me quote him to illustrate the point better: Is education “preparing our boys and girls less for passing standards of examinations and more for making the best use of their lives as citizens of the State”? Is “civilisation driving Nature farther and farther out of reach of the majority, until realisation of its beauties and wonders and our own affinity with God's creations, is becoming lost in the materialistic life of the crowd, with its depressing conditions of work and hectic search for pleasure among man-made squalid surroundings of bricks and mortar”? Ladies and gentlemen The nation appreciates the role of the Scouts and Guides movement in its history of over 100 years in India. I wish all success to The Bharat Scouts and Guides in its future endeavours. I once again congratulate the winners of Awards and thank the National Commissioner and the President for inviting me to this function. 